We just saw how to investigate blockchain data,
using an online block explorer.
We're not ready yet to explore the data programmatically, like we mentioned.
For that, you'll need to download some software which will focus on in a later lesson.
For now, we didn't want to prepare you for what you
can expect to see when you start exploring this data.
For this example, we're using the same data we saw with the block explorer.
This is considered to be human readable format for this data.
It's structured using Json into a set of key value pairs.
Here we can see all the same data that we did before.
Here's the block header,
which contains the hash,
confirmations, and many other details.
As we mentioned, when using the block explorer,
the most notable is the block hash,
height, previous block, and timestamp.
You might not know what all these are yet, and that's fine.
If you're curious, you can go to the Bitcoin developer glossary to learn more.
We put a link to this down below the video.
Here, we can also see the body of the block which
contains the hash of each transaction held in the block.
Using the hash values,
we can investigate the details of these transactions.
Let's take a look at this blocks coin-based transaction.
Coin-based transactions are easy to
find since they're the first transaction in the block.
What we see here, looks a lot like the block header,
but now it's the information for this specific block.
The most important information,
is the transaction id,
hash, transaction inputs and transaction outputs.
This might look a little different than before,
but it's still the exact details we had seen
about our transaction when we used the block explorer.
Here's the transaction inputs and outputs just like before.
First, we'll look at the transaction inputs shown here as VIN.
When Bitcoin is sent,
inputs are collected from the network and combined
together to send to the address specified by the sender.
The amounts that are used as the inputs are what is shown here.
These inputs are combined together to make up the amount sent,
the minor fee, and any change that is due back to the sender.
Let's look at each of these in the data we have here.
The transaction outputs are shown here as VOUT.
First, they show the amount sent and second,
the change that was given back to the sender.
In this example, we can see that over 12 Bitcoin
were sent and that no change was given back to the sender.
The change is the value of the full input minus the value sent minus the miners reward.
In this case, there's no value left
over so there's no change to be given back to the sender.
That's the basics of this data using
the human readable Json format you'll encounter later in the program.
One last thing we wanted to cover is what it looks like for
a transaction to be in non-human readable format.
Hopefully that clears out why we keep using this term.
Let's take a look at a transaction.
Transactions in the network needs to follow the Blockchain protocol.
In this case, the data needs to be formatted in a hex encoded string.
Hex encoded is just a specific format that uses characters ranging from zero zero to ff.
As you can tell, it's not friendly to look at.
We'll encounter these sometimes and it's important to know
about them but it doesn't ever get any easier to read.
That's everything we wanted to cover about block and transaction data for now.
Take some time to look at data in the block explorer,
then come back and see how that's represented in this new data format.
It helps to be clear how each of these basic ideas are represented.
Whether it be on a website,
a data structure or later on in an application.